---
layout: post
title: "Using SQLite with C#"
description: " "
date: 2023-10-13
tags: [sqlite, CSharp]
comments: true
share: true
---

SQLite is a lightweight, file-based database engine that is widely used for storing data in various applications. It is known for its simplicity, speed, and reliability. In this blog post, we will explore how to use SQLite with C#.

## Table of Contents
- [Setting up SQLite in C#](#setting-up-sqlite-in-c)
- [Connecting to a SQLite Database](#connecting-to-a-sqlite-database)
- [Executing SQLite Queries](#executing-sqlite-queries)
- [Retrieving Data from SQLite](#retrieving-data-from-sqlite)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Setting up SQLite in C#

To start working with SQLite in C#, you will need to add the `System.Data.SQLite` NuGet package to your project. Open your project in Visual Studio, right-click on the project name in the Solution Explorer, and select "Manage NuGet Packages". Search for `System.Data.SQLite` and install it.

## Connecting to a SQLite Database

Once you have added the `System.Data.SQLite` package to your project, you can start using SQLite in your C# code. The first step is to establish a connection to a SQLite database. You can do this by creating a new instance of the `SQLiteConnection` class and passing the connection string as a parameter.

```csharp
using System.Data.SQLite;

// Create a connection to SQLite database
SQLiteConnection connection = new SQLiteConnection("Data Source=mydatabase.db;Version=3;");
```

Make sure to replace `mydatabase.db` with the actual path to your SQLite database file.

## Executing SQLite Queries

After successfully connecting to the SQLite database, you can execute various SQL queries using the `SQLiteCommand` class. This class represents a SQL statement or stored procedure to execute against the SQLite database. You can create a new instance of `SQLiteCommand`, specify the SQL query, and associate it with the SQLite connection.

```csharp
using System.Data.SQLite;

// Create a command to execute a query
string sqlQuery = "INSERT INTO Customers (Name, Email) VALUES ('John Doe', 'john.doe@example.com')";
SQLiteCommand command = new SQLiteCommand(sqlQuery, connection);

// Execute the query
command.ExecuteNonQuery();
```

In the above example, we are executing an `INSERT` query to insert a new record into the `Customers` table.

## Retrieving Data from SQLite

To retrieve data from a SQLite database, you can use the `SQLiteDataReader` class. This class represents a forward-only stream of rows from a query result. After executing a query, you can call the `ExecuteReader` method on the `SQLiteCommand` object to retrieve the data.

```csharp
using System.Data.SQLite;

// Create a command to execute a query
string sqlQuery = "SELECT * FROM Customers";
SQLiteCommand command = new SQLiteCommand(sqlQuery, connection);

// Execute the query and get the data reader
SQLiteDataReader reader = command.ExecuteReader();

// Loop through the result set and access the data
while (reader.Read())
{
    string name = reader.GetString(0);
    string email = reader.GetString(1);
    
    Console.WriteLine($"Name: {name}, Email: {email}");
}

// Close the reader
reader.Close();
```

In the above example, we are executing a `SELECT` query to retrieve all records from the `Customers` table. We then loop through the result set and print the name and email of each customer.

## Conclusion

Using SQLite with C# provides a lightweight and efficient way to store and retrieve data in your applications. With the help of the `System.Data.SQLite` package, you can easily connect to a SQLite database, execute queries, and retrieve data. SQLite is a versatile choice for small to medium-sized data storage needs, offering simplicity and reliability.

For more information, you can refer to the [System.Data.SQLite documentation](https://system.data.sqlite.org/) and the [SQLite official website](https://www.sqlite.org/).

#sqlite #CSharp